# Open Source the Law

*Note: This Essay was submitted to the TxP progress prize competition.
You can find out more about TxP ('Technology and Policy')
[here.](https://txp.fyi/progress-prize)*

I will make a modest proposal: with a few small reforms, we could make
the English legal system significantly more competitive. I will use a
few basic historical case-studies to show how Britain is unusually
well-placed to take advantage of new technology in generative AI. I hope
to make a novel case for both the importance of law to progress and
Britain's comparative legal advantage.

## 1. Why Law Matters

Traditionally, progress studies have ignored law as a field of
improvement. This isn't surprising -- economics treats law as
'transaction cost' which could ideally be removed altogether. It is
treated essentially like friction in a rocket launch. Doing so,
especially in the British context, is a mistake. Legal systems are
essential components of all existing market economies, and in this
regard English[^1] legal system is exceptionally successful. England has
several of the world's largest law firms; a well-respected profession
and judiciary; and receives a huge volume of business via
choice-of-forum clauses in contracts. Legal services are one of the UK's
largest service exports and constitute an important source of soft
power. Nonetheless, competitive advantage is never assured and global
law firms are in constant competition with each other and other
dispute-resolution services.

## 2. Changing Legal Terrain

Markets change. For the first time in 200 years a credible alternative
to existing legal methods has been produced. I am referring to the
varied suite of 'LawTech' products, which range from contract management
software, document reviewers, general paperwork tools, to more ambitious
proposals for low-cost advice generators. The market for these tools is
already huge: legal tech companies are now valued in the billions and
are used by the majority of law firms. Anyone with half a brain can see
that new developments in large language models are relevant to this
space. Law is a social technology which runs on natural language and is
arguably the most textualized social practice on earth. In other words,
legal systems contain a vast, highly complex textual corpus related to a
single centralised discipline. When it comes to training legal models,
these masses of text-as-data are basically natural resources each nation
possesses exclusively for its own benefit:[^2] the crucial question now,
as with all resources, is access.

## 3. A Single Reform

My proposal is that all English case reports -- current and past --
should be made available to the public for free. Currently the majority
of this immense corpus is controlled privately by two companies. First,
the charity known as the 'Incorporated Council for Law Reporting'
(ICLR); second, a company called the 'All England Law Reports.' Both
charge high fees for access to these cases and restrict how they can be
used. Neither are 'the' official reporter, but they nonetheless have an
effective monopoly on the legal corpus. My proposal is to produce a
public, machine-readable version of the law reporting corpus available
to anyone who wants to use it. Why would this be beneficial? Simple:
this corpus is one of the oldest continuous bodies of text dealing with
legal cases and would be invaluable for creating LLM-powered legal tech.

Plurality is the name of the game: public access would allow researchers
and innovators to train new (English) legal tools. For example, tools
for giving legal advice and predicting court decisions, thereby vastly
reducing the financial and time cost of legal services. This would both
reduce transaction costs (which are considerable) and access to justice
for all manner of clients. The success of these tools might also
stimulate more extensive text-production, such as the publication of
case reports at every level of adjudication and the immense mass of
pre-litigation arguments. More ambitiously, if this technology reaches a
sufficient level of reliability the government could offer it as an
optional, alternative form of dispute resolution in civil cases. These
developments would have the potential to make the English legal system
into the most dynamic and advanced in the world.

## 4. The British (English) Advantage

England has many unique advantages when it comes to legal AI. First, its
legal corpus. As a common law system, England has a rich and detailed
record of previously decided cases. It is likely England has more total
legal text than civil law countries which rely extensively on codes.
England also compares favourably with other common legal systems. It has
a culture of data storage (going back to the 12th century), pre-dates
the others by hundreds of years, and is (legally) unbroken by
revolution: 16th century cases are still cited in court. Consequently,
England has a larger total corpus of useful, relevant material than
virtually any other common law country.[^3] As with coal, England is
richly endowed with the legal resources necessary for the next
industrial revolution. Unlike coal, these resources are controlled by
two actors which do virtually nothing[^4] with them.

Second, England has a tradition of market-oriented reform in the legal
system. Historically, English judges and lawyers have regarded litigants
as 'clients.' For example, in the 16th century there were three legal
systems all operating side-by-side competing for client business. In the
19th century this service-provision mentality led to extensive court
reforms (including the ICLR itself), such as the establishment of the
county courts. This latter reform is notable for being choice-driven. It
allowed litigants -- 'the customers' - to choose a single judge in the
place of the jury. English lawyers still see themselves as service
providers when it comes to private law: if you want AI-generated advice
then you can have it.

Third, in England, much like the US, we accept data-mining of judgments.
Civil law countries such as France have already banned the use of legal
text-mining. One reason is because civil law countries typically pretend
judges simply apply the law (found in codes) rather than making it with
their own discretion. Text-mining threatens to undermine this fantasy by
revealing judicial foibles. Conversely, English lawyers accept judges
make law with their own personal political and moral beliefs. What does
this all mean? In addition to possessing unparalleled raw textual
resources, we also have right cultural framework to make use of them.
Combine this with England's economic size, strong research base, and
impressive legal market, and you get a clear national advantage.

## 5. Conclusion

It is rare for so much to be achievable with such a modest reform.
Merely moving court reporting from a small private organisation to a
national one would open up England's unique advantages in legal tech. So
let's do it.

[^1]: 'English' because England and Scotland have separate legal
    systems. The former is substantially more economically successful
    than the latter.

[^2]: Law is not like art. A model trained on French law is useless in
    England, and vice-versa. There is no plausible 'general model' with
    current legal texts.

[^3]: The US is an exception, although the fragmentation into separate
    states means that there is no single corpus which can be used for a
    general tool.

[^4]: The ICLR '[case
    genie'](https://www.iclr.co.uk/products/iclr-4/case-genie/),
    supposedly 'powered by AI', is remarkably crap.
